WIP: Start building out the seqera containers part II blog post. (#2740)
nf-core/website: sites/main-site/src/content/blog/2024/seqera-containers-part-2.mdx

The lockfiles can be accessed remotely via the Wave API, so we can treat them much in the same
way that we treat remote container images.

As a reminder, they look something like this:

```yaml title="FastQC Conda lockfile for linux/amd64"
# micromamba env export --explicit
# This file may be used to create an environment using:
# $ conda create --name <env> --file <this file>
# platform: linux-64
@EXPLICIT
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/_libgcc_mutex-0.1-conda_forge.tar.bz2#d7c89558ba9fa0495403155b64376d81
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/libgomp-13.2.0-h77fa898_7.conda#abf3fec87c2563697defa759dec3d639
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/_openmp_mutex-4.5-2_gnu.tar.bz2#73aaf86a425cc6e73fcf236a5a46396d
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/libgcc-ng-13.2.0-h77fa898_7.conda#72ec1b1b04c4d15d4204ece1ecea5978
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/alsa-lib-1.2.11-hd590300_1.conda#0bb492cca54017ea314b809b1ee3a176
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/bzip2-1.0.8-hd590300_5.conda#69b8b6202a07720f448be700e300ccf4
# .. and so on
```

:::

## Pipelines

> Containers are module-level are great, but we need to tie these into the pipelines where they will run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Containers at module-level are great, but we need to tie these into the pipelines where they will run.
```

---
title: 'Migration from Biocontainers to Seqera Containers: Part 2'
subtitle: "nf-core containers automation: how it'll all work behind the curtain"
pubDate: 2024-09-24T09:20:00+01:00 # TODO: UPDATE PUBLISH DATE
headerImage: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1711109631679-c9e1094d3118
headerImageAlt: Photo by Rafael Garcin on Unsplash
authors:
    - 'ewels'
    - 'edmundmiller'
label:
    - 'modules'
    - 'wave'
    - 'seqera containers'
embedHeaderImage: false
---

import creation_flow from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-2/creation_flow.excalidraw.svg?raw';
import renovate_flow from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-2/renovate_flow.excalidraw.svg?raw';

import { Image } from 'astro:assets';
import { YouTube } from '@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube';

# Introduction

> [Wave](https://seqera.io/wave/) is a open-source software that Seqera released in the fall of 2022 in Barcelona.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Wave](https://seqera.io/wave/) is an open-source software that Seqera released at the [Nextflow Summit Barcelona](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PTbiCVq0-sE) in the fall of 2022.
```
Link the YouTube video?

It enables users to create software containers on demand, to rapidly speed up the development cycle.
Wave has a number of tricks up its sleeve, but in its simplest form, it can be passed a list of conda packages
and build a container with those packages installed.

> [Seqera Containers](https://seqera.io/containers/) is a service for the bioinformatics community that's built on top of Wave,
> providing an easy user interface to quickly create a container with a set of conda packages
> and share that container image with others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Seqera Containers](https://seqera.io/containers/) is a service for the bioinformatics community that's built on top of Wave,
providing an easy user interface to quickly create a container with a set of conda packages
and share it with others.
```

> In nf-core we've been excited to better adopt Wave in our workflows, but have been looking for the right way to do it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In nf-core, we've been excited to adopt Wave more fully in our workflows and have been looking for the right way to do it.
```

With the announcement of Seqera Containers we felt it was the right time to put in the effort to migrate
our containers to be built using Wave, using Seqera Containers to host the container images for our modules.

You can read more about our motivation for this change in [Part 1 of this blog post](https://nf-co.re/blog/2024/seqera-containers-part-1).

> Here in Part 2 we will dig into the technical details: how it all works behind the curtain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, in Part 2, we will dig into the technical details: how it all works behind the curtain.
```

You don't need to know or understand any of this as an end-user of nf-core pipelines,
or even as a contributor to nf-core modules, but we thought it would be interesting to share the details.

> It's mostly to serve as an architectural plan for the nf-core maintainers and infrastrcuture teams.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's mostly to serve as an architectural plan for the nf-core maintainers and infrastructure teams.
```

# The end goal

Before we dig into how the details of how the automation will work, let's summarise the end goal of this migration:

> "What we call the beginning is often the end. And to make an end is to make a beginning. The end is where to start from."<br /><small>_T.S. Eliot_</small>

## Usage summary

> The main thing to know is that in the future, maintainers will now _only_ need to change
> module `environment.yml` files to update or change software dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main thing to know is that, with the adoption of Seqera Containers, maintainers will _only_ need to change
module `environment.yml` files to update or change software dependencies.
```

Glossary:

-   [`linux/amd64`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86-64): Regular intel CPUs (aka `x86_64`)
-   [`linux/arm64`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AArch64): ARM CPUs (eg. AWS Graviton, aka `AArch64`). Not Apple Silicon.
-   [Apptainer](https://apptainer.org/): Alternative to Singularity, uses same image format
-   [Mamba](https://mamba.readthedocs.io): Alternative to Conda, uses same conda environment files

:::tip{.fa-comment-question title="Singularity: oras or https?" collapse}

Unfamiliar with `oras://`? Don't worry, it's relatively new in the field.
It's a new protocol to reference container images, similar to `docker://` or `shub://`.
It allows Singularity to interact with any OCI ([Open Container Initiative](https://opencontainers.org/))
compliant registry to pull images.

Using `oras` has some advantages:

-   Singularity handles pulls in the process task, rather than it happening in the Nextflow head job
    -   This means less resource usage on the head node, and more parallelisation
-   Singularity can use authentication to pull from private registries

>     (see [Singularity docs](https://docs.sylabs.io/guides/main/user-guide/cli/singularity_registry.html)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    (see [Singularity docs](https://docs.sylabs.io/guides/main/user-guide/cli/singularity_registry.html) for more information).
```

However, there are some downsides:

-   Shared cache Nextflow options such as `$NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR` and `$NXF_SINGULARITY_LIBRARYDIR` do not work
-   Singularity must be installed to download images for offline use

> -   It's not supported by all versions of Singularity / Apptainer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   `oras` is not supported by all versions of Singularity / Apptainer
```

As such, we will continue to use `https` downloads for Singularity `SIF` images for now.
However, we will start to provide new `-profile singularity_oras` profiles for anyone who
would prefer to fetch images using the newer `oras` protocol.

If you'd like to know more, check out the amazing [bytesize talk](https://nf-co.re/events/2024/bytesize_singularity_containers_hpc)
by Marco Claudio De La Pierre ([@marcodelapierre](https://github.com/marcodelapierre/)) from June 2024:

<YouTube id="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zoCC_dkhjD0" poster="http://i3.ytimg.com/vi/zoCC_dkhjD0/hqdefault.jpg" />

:::

## Modules

All nf-core pipelines use a single container per process, and the majority of processes are
encapsulated within shared modules in the [nf-core/modules](https://github.com/nf-core/modules) repository.
As such, we must start with containers at the module level.

:::tip{.fa-brands.fa-github title="GitHub issue"}

> For the latest discussion and progress on _bulk-updating_ existing nf-core modules, please see GitHub issue

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the latest discussion and progress on _bulk-updating_ existing nf-core modules, see GitHub issue
```
Link?

[nf-core/modules#6698](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/issues/6698).
:::

### `main.nf`

With this switch, we simplify the `container` declaration, listing only the default container image: Docker, for `linux/amd64`.
There will no longer be any string interpolation or logic within the container string.

The `container` string is **never edited by hand** and is fully handled by the modules automation.

With [the FastQC module](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/f768b283dbd8fc79d0d92b0f68665d7bed94cabc/modules/nf-core/fastqc/main.nf#L6-L8)
as an example:

```diff title="main.nf"
process FASTQC {
     label 'process_medium'

     conda "${moduleDir}/environment.yml"
+    container "fastqc:0.12.1--5cfd0f3cb6760c42" // automatically generated
-    container "${ workflow.containerEngine == 'singularity' && !task.ext.singularity_pull_docker_container ?
-        'https://depot.galaxyproject.org/singularity/fastqc:0.12.1--hdfd78af_0' :
-        'biocontainers/fastqc:0.12.1--hdfd78af_0' }"

     input:
     tuple val(meta), path(reads)
```

> We considered removing both `conda` and `container` declarations from the module `main.nf` file entirely,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We considered removing both `conda` and `container` declarations from the module `main.nf` file entirely.
```

> however we see benefit for keeping these in this form because:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, we see benefit in keeping these in this form because:
```

-   It's clearer to those exploring the code about what the module requires.
-   The container string is needed to tie the module to the pipeline config files

>     (see [Building config files](#building-config-files) below).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    (see [Building config files](#building-config-files) below)
```

            build_id: 5cfd0f3cb6760c42_1
            scan_id: 6fc310277b74
        linux_arm64:
            name: community.wave.seqera.io/library/fastqc:0.12.1--d3caca66b4f3d3b0
            build_id: d3caca66b4f3d3b0_1
            scan_id: d9a1db848b9b
    singularity:
        linux_amd64:
            name: oras://community.wave.seqera.io/library/fastqc:0.12.1--0827550dd72a3745
            https: https://community-cr-prod.seqera.io/docker/registry/v2/blobs/sha256/b2/b280a35770a70ed67008c1d6b6db118409bc3adbb3a98edcd55991189e5116f6/data
            build_id: 0827550dd72a3745_1
        linux_arm64:
            name: oras://community.wave.seqera.io/library/fastqc:0.12.1--b2ccdee5305e5859
            https: https://community-cr-prod.seqera.io/docker/registry/v2/blobs/sha256/76/76e744b425a6b4c7eb8f12e03fa15daf7054de36557d2f0c4eb53ad952f9b0e3/data
            build_id: b2ccdee5305e5859_1
    conda:
        linux_amd64:
            lockfile: https://wave.seqera.io/v1alpha1/builds/5cfd0f3cb6760c42_1/condalock
        linux_arm64:
            lockfile: https://wave.seqera.io/v1alpha1/builds/d3caca66b4f3d3b0_1/condalock
```

> The four different container images are all built at the same time so share the same snapshot of a given Conda resolution.

Reviewer 3: What does it mean "the same snapshot of a given Conda resolution"? 
It means that they will ping the same version of the Conda packages but are built independently or there is some more magic here that I am not aware?

Author: Yeah this is poorly written. I just mean that they are built at the same point in time, so it's not like building them six months apart when something in the dependency tree has changed. I'll update.

> All images are all built at the same time, avoiding Conda dependency drift.

Author: Rephrased this, hopefully clearer now.

> The four different container images are all built at the same time so share the same snapshot of a given Conda resolution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The four different container images are all built at the same time, so they share the same snapshot of a given Conda resolution.
```

way that we treat remote container images.

As a reminder, they look something like this:

```yaml title="FastQC Conda lockfile for linux/amd64"
# micromamba env export --explicit
# This file may be used to create an environment using:
# $ conda create --name <env> --file <this file>
# platform: linux-64
@EXPLICIT
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/_libgcc_mutex-0.1-conda_forge.tar.bz2#d7c89558ba9fa0495403155b64376d81
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/libgomp-13.2.0-h77fa898_7.conda#abf3fec87c2563697defa759dec3d639
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/_openmp_mutex-4.5-2_gnu.tar.bz2#73aaf86a425cc6e73fcf236a5a46396d
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/libgcc-ng-13.2.0-h77fa898_7.conda#72ec1b1b04c4d15d4204ece1ecea5978
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/alsa-lib-1.2.11-hd590300_1.conda#0bb492cca54017ea314b809b1ee3a176
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/bzip2-1.0.8-hd590300_5.conda#69b8b6202a07720f448be700e300ccf4
# .. and so on
```

:::

## Pipelines

Container information at shared module-level is great, but it's not enough.
Nextflow doesn't know about module `meta.yml` files (they're an nf-core invention),

> so we need to somehow tie these into the pipeline code where they will run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so we need to tie these into the pipeline code where they will run.
```

The heart of the solution is to auto-generate a config file for each software packaging type (Docker, Singularity, Conda)
and platform (`linux/arch64` and `linux/arm64`).
These will be created by the nf-core/tools CLI and never be edited by hand, so no manual merging will be required.

> They'll simply be regenerated and overwritten every time a module is changed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
They'll simply be regenerated and overwritten every time a version of a module is updated.
```

process { withName: 'NF_PIPELINE:ANALYSIS_PLOTS' { container = 'express_click_pandas_plotly_typing:58d94b8a8e79e144' } }
//.. and so on, for each process in the pipeline
```

Likewise, the conda config files will point to the lockfiles for each process:

```groovy title="config/conda_lockfiles_amd64.config"
// AUTOGENERATED CONFIG FILE - DO NOT EDIT
process { withName: 'NF_PIPELINE:FASTQC'         { conda = 'https://wave.seqera.io/v1alpha1/builds/5cfd0f3cb6760c42_1/condalock' } }
process { withName: 'NF_PIPELINE:MULTIQC'        { conda = 'https://wave.seqera.io/v1alpha1/builds/9968ff4994a2e2d7_1/condalock' } }
process { withName: 'NF_PIPELINE:ANALYSIS_PLOTS' { conda = 'https://wave.seqera.io/v1alpha1/builds/58d94b8a8e79e144_1/condalock' } }
//.. and so on, for each process in the pipeline
```

The main `nextflow.config` file will import these config files, depending on the [profile selected](#usage-summary)
by the person running the pipeline.

Singularity will have separate config files and associated `-profile`s for both `oras` and `https` containers,
so that users can choose which to use.

> We're taking this opportunity to update the `apptainer` and `mamba` profiles too,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're also taking this opportunity to update the `apptainer` and `mamba` profiles too,
```

plus new nf-test snapshots for the software version checks.

Only the interesting part needs to be edited by the developer (which tools to use) and all other
steps are fully automated.

## Container image creation

As with most automation in nf-core, container creation will happen in GitHub Actions.
Edits to a module's `environment.yml` file will trigger a workflow that uses the
[`wave-cli`](https://github.com/seqeralabs/wave-cli) to build the container images.

1. GitHub Actions identifies changes in the `environment.yml` file.
2. `wave-cli` is executed on the updated environment file.
3. Seqera Containers builds new containers for various platforms and architectures.
4. GitHub Actions runs stub tests commits the updated the
   [version snapshot](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/1fe2e6de89778971df83632f16f388cf845836a9/modules/nf-core/bowtie/align/tests/main.nf.test.snap#L32-L46).

<div class="excalidraw">
    <Fragment set:html={creation_flow} alt="Container creation flow" />
</div>

Once this GitHub Actions run completes it will push the new commits back to the PR
and the regular nf-test CI will run.

## nf-test versions snapshot

> One of the primary reasons that we were so excited to adopt nf-test was the snapshot in functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the primary reasons that we were so excited to adopt nf-test was the snapshot functionality.
```

```json title="main.nf.test.snap" {4-7}
    "versions": {
        "content": [
            {
                "BOWTIE_ALIGN": {
                    "bowtie": "1.3.0",
                    "samtools": "1.16.1"
                }
            }
        ],
        "meta": {
            "nf-test": "0.9.0",
            "nextflow": "24.04.4"
        },
        "timestamp": "2024-09-27T10:42:58.892298"
    },
```

This gives a second level of confirmation that the containers were correctly generated.

When updating containers, the nf-test snapshot is parsed and compared to the snapshot
from before the new containers were built.
The snapshot changes are discarded if anything other than the `versions` key changed,
so it should only vary in the software versions reported.

This means that we can automatically commit the updated snapshot file in the PR if
the tool output is unchanged, saving the developer from taking this extra step.

:::tip

Note that in the above example, the versions are in the snapshot in plain text,
not using an md5 hash. This is a change that we will roll out for all modules,
as it makes verification in the PR much easier.

:::

## Automatic version bumps with Renovate

> We've recently adopted Renovate, a tool for automated dependency updates.

Reviewer 2: Link?

Author: ```suggestion
We've recently adopted [Renovate](https://renovatebot.com/), a tool for automated dependency updates.
```

    - bioconda::bwa=0.7.18
    # renovate: datasource=conda depName=bioconda/samtools
    - bioconda::samtools=1.20
    # renovate: datasource=conda depName=bioconda/htslib
    - bioconda::htslib=1.20.0
```

[These comments will be added](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/issues/6504) through
[the batch module updates](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/issues/5828) happening this summer.
Future modules will have these comments [added automatically and linted](https://github.com/nf-core/tools/issues/3184)
by the nf-core/tools CLI.

The comments allow some scary regexes to find the conda dependencies and their versions
in nf-core/modules, and check if there's a new version available.
If there is a new version available, the Renovate bot will create a PR bumping the version,
which in turn will kick off the container creation GitHub Action.

The process will be very similar to the diagram laid out above, however we can go a step further:
if the new software versions have no effect on the results of the tests, the PR will be automatically merged:

<div class="excalidraw">
    <Fragment set:html={renovate_flow} alt="Container creation flow" />
</div>

> So: if all tests pass, the pull request is automatically merged without human intervention.

Reviewer 3: ❤️

In case of test failures, the Renovate bot automatically requests a review from the appropriate
module maintainer using the `CODEOWNERS` file.
The maintainer then steps in to fix failing tests and request a final review before merging.

This efficient process ensures that software dependencies stay current with minimal manual oversight,
reducing noise and streamlining development workflows.
This will hopefully be the end of the _"can I get a review on this version bump"_ requests in `#review-requests`!

# Automation - Pipelines

We now have nice, up to date software packaging for the shared nf-core/modules with minimal manual intervention.
However, we need to propagate these changes to the pipelines that use these modules.
There are two main areas that we need to address:

## Building config files

As [described above](#pipelines), pipelines will have a set of config files automatically generated
that specify the container or conda environment for each process in the pipeline.

Creation of these files will be triggered whenever installing, updating or removing a module, via the `nf-core` CLI.

> The config files will be completely regenerated each time, so there will never be any manual merging required.

Reviewer 3: Then, if there are any local modules, their configurations will need to be in a separate config?

Author: Good point. I guess either:
1. The use `container` declaration as before and are picked up by `nextflow inspect` OR
2. They have a `meta.yml` file in their subdirectories which is picked up as with shared modules OR
3. They have their own Nextflow configuration outside of the auto-generated files

Local modules deserve their own section though 👍🏻

This is a known limitation and we are currently working hard on a new version of `nextflow inspect`
which will return all processes, regardless of whether they are skipped or not.
This will be a requirement for progression with the Seqera Containers migration.

:::

:::note

This process of copying files and using string substituion is a bit of a hack.
If you have any ideas on how to improve this, please let us know!

:::

## Edge cases and local modules

There will always be edge cases that won't fit the automation described above.
Not all software tools can be packaged on Bioconda (though we encourage it where possible!).
For example, some tools have licensing restrictions that prevent them from being distributed in this way.
Other edge-cases include optional usage of container variants for GPU support, or other hardware.

Local modules won't be able to benefit from the Wave CLI automation to fetch containers from Seqera Containers
and will have to be manually updated by the pipeline developer.

For these reasons, we will still support custom `container` declarations in modules
without use of Seqera Containers. It will be up to the module contributors to ensure that these

> are correctly specified and kept up to date manually.

Reviewer 4: Renovate can bump these as well. Might be worth mentioning, might be worth not mentioning.

Author: Yeah I thought that when I was writing, but I think I'd prefer not to mention that. As we basically don't want people to take this route unless they really have to..

These can be specified in the `main.nf` file and added to the autogenerated platform-specific config files,
as long as they remain above the comment line:

```groovy
// AUTOGENERATED CONFIG BELOW THIS POINT - DO NOT EDIT
```

If at all possible then software should be packaged with Bioconda and Seqera Containers.

> Failing that, custom containers should be stored under the nf-core account on the quay.io Docker registry.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Failing that, custom containers should be stored under the nf-core account on the quay.io Docker registry.
[Custom containers can be built with wave in CI, and pushed to quay.io automatically](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/pull/4940) using the same mechanisms as the `environment.yml` files and replacing it with the `Dockerfile`s.
```

Author: Applied with a few tweaks in 4faacdd6c 👍🏻

---
title: 'Migration from Biocontainers to Seqera Containers: Part 2'
subtitle: "nf-core containers automation: how it'll all work behind the curtain"
pubDate: 2024-10-02T09:20:00+01:00
headerImage: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1711109631679-c9e1094d3118
headerImageAlt: Photo by Rafael Garcin on Unsplash
authors:
    - 'ewels'
    - 'edmundmiller'
label:
    - 'modules'
    - 'wave'
    - 'seqera containers'
embedHeaderImage: false
---

import creation_flow from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-2/creation_flow.excalidraw.svg?raw';
import renovate_flow from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-2/renovate_flow.excalidraw.svg?raw';

import { Image } from 'astro:assets';
import { YouTube } from '@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube';

# Introduction

> In nf-core, we've been excited to adopt [Wave](https://seqera.io/wave/) to automte software container builds, and have been

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In nf-core, we've been excited to adopt [Wave](https://seqera.io/wave/) to automate software container builds, and have been
```

---
title: 'Migration from Biocontainers to Seqera Containers: Part 2'
subtitle: "nf-core containers automation: how it'll all work behind the curtain"

> pubDate: 2024-10-02T09:20:00+01:00

Author: ```suggestion
pubDate: 2024-10-02T09:16:00+01:00
```

import renovate_flow from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-2/renovate_flow.excalidraw.svg?raw';

import { Image } from 'astro:assets';
import { YouTube } from '@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube';

# Introduction

[Wave](https://seqera.io/wave/) is an open-source software that Seqera released at the [Nextflow Summit Barcelona](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PTbiCVq0-sE) in the fall of 2022.
It enables users to create software containers on demand, to rapidly speed up the development cycle.
Wave has a number of tricks up its sleeve, but in its simplest form, it can be passed a list of conda packages
and build a container with those packages installed.

[Seqera Containers](https://seqera.io/containers/) is a service for the bioinformatics community that's built on top of Wave,
providing an easy user interface to quickly create a container with a set of conda packages
and share it with others.

In nf-core, we've been excited to adopt Wave more fully in our workflows and have been looking for the right way to do it.
With the announcement of Seqera Containers we felt it was the right time to put in the effort to migrate

> our containers to be built using Wave, using Seqera Containers to host the container images for our modules.

Reviewer 6: tbh not a very snappy start for a blog post. maybe start with the paragraph referencing part 1 and then have a shorter definition of wave and seqera containers. also a tldr; would be great for these kind of long posts

Author: Agreed 👍🏻 Done in 656d40fe7

> In a hurry? Here are the main points:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```
no time for that 🙂

Author: ![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1000/format:webp/1*wuhil5dHn7k-RYG7JW3Uqw.gif)

Here, in Part 2, we will dig into the technical details: how it all works behind the curtain.
You don't need to know or understand any of this as an end-user of nf-core pipelines,
or even as a contributor to nf-core modules, but we thought it would be interesting to share the details.
It's mostly to serve as an architectural plan for the nf-core maintainers and infrastructure teams.

# The end goal

Before we dig into how the details of how the automation will work, let's summarise the end goal of this migration:

> "What we call the beginning is often the end. And to make an end is to make a beginning. The end is where to start from."<br /><small>_T.S. Eliot_</small>

> 

Reviewer 7: I don't think this is useful,  and just takes up space for no purpose

Author: Your review was too slow, I already removed it 😆

## Usage summary

> The main thing to know is that, with the adoption of Seqera Containers, maintainers will _only_ need to change

Reviewer 7: What about tools that don't have conda support? 
```suggestion
The main thing to know is that, with the adoption of Seqera Containers, maintainers will in the vast majority of cases _only_ need to change
```

Author: See "Edge cases" further down. But these are a minority and we generally want to push people towards Bioconda wherever possible, so not sure that I want to give it higher priority than it already has.

Reviewer 6: I count 152 excluded conda tags in the CI = 10% might not be such a small minority...

Author: I removed this sentence in an earlier edit anyway, so not sure it's worth dwelling on. Shout if the phrasing is similarly awkward anywhere else.

> ## Usage summary
> 
> The main thing to know is that, with the adoption of Seqera Containers, maintainers will _only_ need to change
> module `environment.yml` files to update or change software dependencies.
> 
> Pipeline users will see almost no change in current behaviour, but have several new configuration profiles available.
> 
> Glossary:
> 
> -   [`linux/amd64`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86-64): Regular intel CPUs (aka `x86_64`)
> -   [`linux/arm64`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AArch64): ARM CPUs (eg. AWS Graviton, aka `AArch64`). Not Apple Silicon.
> -   [Apptainer](https://apptainer.org/): Alternative to Singularity, uses same image format
> -   [Mamba](https://mamba.readthedocs.io): Alternative to Conda, uses same conda environment files

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
## Glossary

-   [`linux/amd64`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86-64): Regular intel CPUs (aka `x86_64`)
-   [`linux/arm64`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AArch64): ARM CPUs (eg. AWS Graviton, aka `AArch64`). Not Apple Silicon.
-   [Apptainer](https://apptainer.org/): Alternative to Singularity, uses same image format
-   [Mamba](https://mamba.readthedocs.io): Alternative to Conda, uses same conda environment files

## Usage summary

The main thing to know is that, with the adoption of Seqera Containers, maintainers will _only_ need to change
module `environment.yml` files to update or change software dependencies.

Pipeline users will see almost no change in current behaviour, but have several new configuration profiles available.

```

Author: Done in 656d40fe7 👍🏻

> | `-profile`             | Status                                                 | Use case                                                                           |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| nf-core profile             | Status                                                 | Use case                                                                           |
```

This was hard to read with the inline code block in the header, removing it makes it easier to see the header

| `apptainer`            | <span class="badge text-bg-warning">Updated</span>     | Singularity images for `linux/amd64` (not Docker, as previously)                   |
| `apptainer_arm`        | <span class="badge text-bg-success">New</span>         | Singularity images for `linux/arm64`, using apptainer                              |
| `apptainer_oras`       | <span class="badge text-bg-success">New</span>         | Singularity images for `linux/amd64` using the `oras://` protocol, using apptainer |
| `apptainer_oras_arm`   | <span class="badge text-bg-success">New</span>         | Singularity images for `linux/arm64` using the `oras://` protocol, using apptainer |
| `conda`                | <span class="badge text-bg-warning">Updated</span>     | Conda lockfiles for `linux/amd64`                                                  |
| `conda_arm`            | <span class="badge text-bg-success">New</span>         | Conda lockfiles for `linux/arm64`                                                  |
| `conda_env`            | <span class="badge text-bg-success">New</span>         | Conda environments with local environment resolution                               |

> | `mamba`                | <span class="badge text-bg-warning">Updated</span>     | Conda lockfiles for `linux/amd64`, using Mamba                                     |

Reviewer 7: What are lock files? This might be something to also introduce wit hteh `arm64` etc thing in the paragraph above

Author: There's a collapsed admonition about these further down, but yeah I agree it could do with being moved up / made more obvious.

Author: Done in c5b13ffa6

However, there are some downsides:

-   Shared cache Nextflow options such as `$NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR` and `$NXF_SINGULARITY_LIBRARYDIR` do not work
-   Singularity must be installed to download images for offline use
-   `oras` is not supported by all versions of Singularity / Apptainer

As such, we will continue to use `https` downloads for Singularity `SIF` images for now.
However, we will start to provide new `-profile singularity_oras` profiles for anyone who
would prefer to fetch images using the newer `oras` protocol.

If you'd like to know more, check out the amazing [bytesize talk](https://nf-co.re/events/2024/bytesize_singularity_containers_hpc)
by Marco Claudio De La Pierre ([@marcodelapierre](https://github.com/marcodelapierre/)) from June 2024:

<YouTube id="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zoCC_dkhjD0" poster="http://i3.ytimg.com/vi/zoCC_dkhjD0/hqdefault.jpg" />

:::

## Modules

All nf-core pipelines use a single container per process, and the majority of processes are
encapsulated within shared modules in the [nf-core/modules](https://github.com/nf-core/modules) repository.

> As such, we must start with containers at the module level.
> 
> :::tip{.fa-brands.fa-github title="GitHub issue"}

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
As such, we must start with containers at the module level.

:::tip{.fa-brands.fa-github title="GitHub issue"}

The changes made to the module files that are as follows: 
```

Because this wasn't exactly clear what we are about to describing here, and the inline code blocks in headers also are a bit iffy

Author: I don't understand this suggested change sorry..?

Reviewer 7: Add the line `The changes made to the module files that are as follows: ` to explain that in the following sections we are describing what changes to specific files we will have to make.

The paragraph above the tip just says:

>  All nf-core pipelines use a single container per process, and the majority of processes are
encapsulated within shared modules in the [nf-core/modules](https://github.com/nf-core/modules) repository.
As such, we must start with containers at the module level.

Start with doing 'what'? exactly

I guess it was assumed the header names of the two following sections (`main.nf`, `meta.yaml`) would be self explantory, but as the headers are in-line code blocks it wasn't clear to me it was a new section.

Author: How about adding to the headings instead?

### Changes to `main.nf`

### Changes to `meta.yml`

Author: Done in e32935e8f

            name: oras://community.wave.seqera.io/library/fastqc:0.12.1--0827550dd72a3745
            https: https://community-cr-prod.seqera.io/docker/registry/v2/blobs/sha256/b2/b280a35770a70ed67008c1d6b6db118409bc3adbb3a98edcd55991189e5116f6/data
            build_id: 0827550dd72a3745_1
        linux_arm64:
            name: oras://community.wave.seqera.io/library/fastqc:0.12.1--b2ccdee5305e5859
            https: https://community-cr-prod.seqera.io/docker/registry/v2/blobs/sha256/76/76e744b425a6b4c7eb8f12e03fa15daf7054de36557d2f0c4eb53ad952f9b0e3/data
            build_id: b2ccdee5305e5859_1
    conda:
        linux_amd64:
            lockfile: https://wave.seqera.io/v1alpha1/builds/5cfd0f3cb6760c42_1/condalock
        linux_arm64:
            lockfile: https://wave.seqera.io/v1alpha1/builds/d3caca66b4f3d3b0_1/condalock
```

All images are all built at the same time, avoiding Conda dependency drift.
The build and scan IDs allow us to trace back to the build logs and security scans for these images.

The Conda lockfiles are a new addition to the nf-core ecosystem and will help reproducibility for Conda users.

:::info{.fa-lock title="Conda lockfiles recap" collapse}

> Conda lockfiles were mentioned in [Part I of this blog post](/blog/2024/seqera-containers-part-1#exceptionally-reproducible).

Reviewer 7: Should be higher up when introducing new concepts

Author: Done in c5b13ffa6

The lockfiles can be accessed remotely via the Wave API, so we can treat them much in the same
way that we treat remote container images.

As a reminder, they look something like this:

```yaml title="FastQC Conda lockfile for linux/amd64"
# micromamba env export --explicit
# This file may be used to create an environment using:
# $ conda create --name <env> --file <this file>
# platform: linux-64
@EXPLICIT
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/_libgcc_mutex-0.1-conda_forge.tar.bz2#d7c89558ba9fa0495403155b64376d81
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/libgomp-13.2.0-h77fa898_7.conda#abf3fec87c2563697defa759dec3d639
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/_openmp_mutex-4.5-2_gnu.tar.bz2#73aaf86a425cc6e73fcf236a5a46396d
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/libgcc-ng-13.2.0-h77fa898_7.conda#72ec1b1b04c4d15d4204ece1ecea5978
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/alsa-lib-1.2.11-hd590300_1.conda#0bb492cca54017ea314b809b1ee3a176
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/bzip2-1.0.8-hd590300_5.conda#69b8b6202a07720f448be700e300ccf4
# .. and so on
```

:::

## Pipelines

> Container information at shared module-level is great, but it's not enough.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Container information at module-level is great, but it's not enough.
```

process { withName: 'NF_PIPELINE:ANALYSIS_PLOTS' { conda = 'https://wave.seqera.io/v1alpha1/builds/58d94b8a8e79e144_1/condalock' } }
//.. and so on, for each process in the pipeline
```

The main `nextflow.config` file will import these config files, depending on the [profile selected](#usage-summary)
by the person running the pipeline.

Singularity will have separate config files and associated `-profile`s for both `oras` and `https` containers,
so that users can choose which to use.

Local modules and any edge-case shared modules that cannot use the Seqera Containers automation
will need the pipeline developer to hardcode container names and conda lockfiles manually.
These can be added to the above config files as long as they remain above the comment line:

```groovy
// AUTOGENERATED CONFIG BELOW THIS POINT - DO NOT EDIT
```

We're also taking this opportunity to update the `apptainer` and `mamba` profiles too,
they will import the exact same config files as the `singularity` and `conda` profiles.

Here's roughly how the `nextflow.config` file with the `-profile` config includes will look:

::::info{.fa-code title="nextflow.config" collapse}

:::note

> Boilerplate code (eg. disabling other container engines) has been removed from this

Reviewer 7: Hmmm should definitely have the disabling of the others, we implemented because @maxibor found a really awkward behaviour when we didn't do this a while ago (don't have time to find that thread atm though)

Author: Yup, I only mean for the sake of the blog post. I'll make this more clear.

Author: Done in 8c2cab641

                    "samtools": "1.16.1"
                }
            }
        ],
        "meta": {
            "nf-test": "0.9.0",
            "nextflow": "24.04.4"
        },
        "timestamp": "2024-09-27T10:42:58.892298"
    },
```

This gives a second level of confirmation that the containers were correctly generated.

When updating containers, the nf-test snapshot is parsed and compared to the snapshot
from before the new containers were built.
The snapshot changes are discarded if anything other than the `versions` key changed,
so it should only vary in the software versions reported.
If any other changes are detected, the snapshot change will be rejected and _not_ committed back to the PR.
Then PR reviewers will see failing tests and need to manually update the snapshot file.

This means that we can automatically commit the updated snapshot file in the PR if
the tool output is unchanged, saving the developer from taking this extra step.

:::tip

Note that in the above example, the versions are in the snapshot in plain text,
not using an md5 hash. This is a change that we will roll out for all modules,
as it makes verification in the PR much easier.

:::

> ## Automatic version bumps with Renovate

Reviewer 7: This is honestly scaring the shit out of me, I'm expecting huge waves of PRs that will be ignored and never addressed and @SPPearce will rage quit.

The vast majority of 'CODEOWNERS' will never come back to nf-core so will go stale

Reviewer 7: But we can see what happens...

Author: Hopefully 90% of them should auto-merge, resulting in the opposite: nf-core not going stale.

A good success story for this is conda-forge, which automatically updates recipes when new PyPI packages comes out - self reviews and self merges.

If it's problematic, it's easy enough to switch off..

Reviewer 6: same

that specify the container or conda environment for each process in the pipeline.

Creation of these files will be triggered whenever installing, updating or removing a module, via the `nf-core` CLI.
The config files will be completely regenerated each time, so there will never be any manual merging required.

The trickiest part of this process is linking the module containers to the pipeline processes.
Modules can be imported into pipelines with any alias or scope.
We need to match this against the values that we find in the module `meta.yml` files:

-   Run `nextflow inspect` to generate default Docker `linux/arch64` config
-   Copy this file and replace the container names with the relevant container for each platform,
    using the `meta.yml` files that match the Docker container name

This is why we duplicate the default docker container in both `main.nf` and `meta.yml` files -
it allows us to link the module to the pipeline.

:::warning

Currently, `nextflow inspect` works by executing a dry-run of the pipeline.
We can run using `-profile test`, but any processes that are skipped due to pipeline logic
will not be included in the config file.

> This is a known limitation and we are currently working hard on a new version of `nextflow inspect`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This is a known limitation and we are currently working hard with Seqera on a new version of `nextflow inspect`
```

Author: ```suggestion
This is a known limitation and we are currently working hard with the Nextflow team at Seqera on a new version of `nextflow inspect`
```

Reviewer 7: Yup works!

which will return all processes, regardless of whether they are skipped or not.
This will be a requirement for progression with the Seqera Containers migration.

:::

:::note

This process of copying files and using string substituion is a bit of a hack.
If you have any ideas on how to improve this, please let us know!

:::

## Edge cases and local modules

There will always be edge cases that won't fit the automation described above.
Not all software tools can be packaged on Bioconda (though we encourage it where possible!).
For example, some tools have licensing restrictions that prevent them from being distributed in this way.
Other edge-cases include optional usage of container variants for GPU support, or other hardware.

> Local modules won't be able to benefit from the Wave CLI automation to fetch containers from Seqera Containers

Reviewer 3: ❤️
